Android/README.md, before:

# Using the engine


## Adding games to the game list

By default games have to be placed into the external storage device. This is
usually the SD-card, but this can vary.

Place the game into the directory

    <EXTERN>/ags/<GAME NAME>/

<GAME NAME> is what will be displayed in the game list.



## Game options

Global options can be configured by pressing the MENU button on the game list
and choosing the "Preferences" item. These settings apply to all games unless
they have their own custom preferences set.

By performing a longclick on a game entry in the list, a menu opens that lets
you choose custom preferences specifically for that game.

In the same menu you can also choose "Continue" to resume the game from
your last savegame.



## Controls

-   Finger movement: Moving the mouse cursor
-   Single finger tap: Perform a left click
-   Tap with two fingers: Perform a right click
-   Longclick: Hold down the left mouse button until tapping the screen again
-   MENU button: Opens a menu for key input and quitting the game
-   MENU button longpress: Opens and closes the onscreen keyboard
-   BACK button: Sends ESC key command to the game
-   BACK button longpress: "Quit game" dialog




## Downloading prebuilt engine packages

Unsigned APKs suitable for running any compatible AGS game may be found linked in the
corresponding release posts on [AGS forum board](http://www.adventuregamestudio.co.uk/forums/index.php?board=28.0).



## MIDI playback

For midi music playback, you have to download GUS patches. We recommend
"Richard Sanders's GUS patches" from this address:

http://alleg.sourceforge.net/digmid.html

A direct link is here:

http://www.eglebbk.dds.nl/program/download/digmid.dat

This 'digmid.dat' is, in fact, a **bzip2** archive, containing actual data file,
which should be about 25 MB large. Extract that file, rename it to **patches.dat**
and place it into the  **ags** directory alongside your games.



# Building the engine

The Android app consists of three parts, each with different requirements:

- **Java app**: needs the Android SDK for Windows, Linux or Mac. If you build from command-line as opposed to Android Studio you also need Apache Ant. Requires built native engine library.
- **Native engine library**: needs the Android NDK for Windows, Linux or Mac. Requires built native 3rd party libraries.
- **Native 3rd party libraries**: need the Android NDK for Linux and number of tools (see full list in the corresponding section below).

For example, if you have got prebuilt native engine library (e.g. provided as a part of AGS release), you may follow instructions for "Java app" straight away.
If you are building from scratch, then first follow "Native 3rd party libraries", then "Native engine library", and "Java app" only then.


## Native 3rd party libraries

These are backend and utility libraries necessary for the AGS engine. Building them currently is only possible on Linux.

Requirements:
* Android NDK r16b (not later). This is the preferred NDK which is still able to build all the libraries and produce output compatible with older devices that we still support. Download link: https://developer.android.com/ndk/downloads/older_releases#ndk-16b-downloads
* Following tools must be installed on your Linux system as they are used for downloading library sources and  during build process: **autoconf**, **automake**, **cmake**, **curl**, **libtool**.

After you have installed Android NDK you have to prepare three standalone toolchains for the android-14 platform, for "arm", "x86" and "mips" processors.
(See https://developer.android.com/ndk/guides/standalone_toolchain.html for general reference.)

Set NDK_HOME variable, pointing to the location of Android NDK at your system, e.g. assuming the ndk is installed in '/opt/android-ndk-r16b':

    $ export NDK_HOME=/opt/android-ndk-r16b

then generate toolchains:

    $ $NDK_HOME/build/tools/make_standalone_toolchain.py --arch arm --api 14 --install-dir $NDK_HOME/platforms/android-14/arm
    $ $NDK_HOME/build/tools/make_standalone_toolchain.py --arch x86 --api 14 --install-dir $NDK_HOME/platforms/android-14/x86
    $ $NDK_HOME/build/tools/make_standalone_toolchain.py --arch mips --api 14 --install-dir $NDK_HOME/platforms/android-14/mips

If you don't specify "--install-dir" this will create an archive in a working directory, in which case you should manually unpack it to the respective place.

Now, assuming `<SOURCE>` is AGS source location,

    $ cd <SOURCE>/Android/buildlibs
    $ ./buildall.sh

This will download, patch, build and properly install the required libraries.

Library sources must be available in `<SOURCE>/libsrc`. Compiled libraries will be put in `<SOURCE>/Android/nativelibs`.


## Native engine library

This is the main AGS engine code. Before building it you must have native 3rd party libraries ready.

**IMPORTANT:** Android port integrates number of plugins as a part of the engine. Some of the plugin sources
may be included as submodules, so make sure to initialize submodules before compiling it, e.g. from the
root <SOURCE> directory:

    $ git submodule update --init --recursive

It must be compiled using the Android NDK. This can
simply be done by running ndk-build within the <SOURCE>Android/library directory.

e.g. (assuming the NDK is installed in /opt)

    $ export PATH=$PATH:/opt/android-ndk-r16b
    $ cd <SOURCE>/Android/library
    $ ndk-build

The native code is built for all current Android architecture, that is armv6, armv7-a,
x86 and mips.


## Java app

There are two parts to the Java app, one is the engine library in `<SOURCE>/Android/library` and the other one is the launcher app. The default launcher which displays a list of games from the SD-card is in `<SOURCE>/Android/launcher_list`.

You must have installed Android SDK for **Android 4.1** (api level 16); this may be done through Android Studio's SDK manager.

The easiest way to build the app is to create an Android project in Eclipse. Choose the "create from existing source" option and point Eclipse to the launcher directory.

To build from the command line, you can use Apache Ant (should have it installed first). If you go this way you also have to download an older version of Android SDK tools folder because ant's scripts were removed from the newer SDKs.
See [this stackoverflow.com question](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/42912824/the-ant-folder-is-suddenly-missing-from-android-sdk-did-google-remove-it) for the reference.
The download link for Linux: https://dl.google.com/android/repository/tools_r25.2.5-linux.zip

Unpack this archive into SDK/tools, *skipping* existing files.
Now you are ready to run the ant script, e.g. (assuming the SDK is installed in /opt):

    $ export ANDROID_HOME=/opt/android-sdk-linux
    $ cd <SOURCE>/Android/launcher_list
    $ ant debug
    $ ant release # for release build



## Links

Android SDK: http://developer.android.com/sdk/

Android NDK: http://developer.android.com/ndk/

Android thread on the AGS forum: http://www.adventuregamestudio.co.uk/yabb/index.php?topic=44768.0

Commit message:

Android: changed long click action for Back key to "Show menu"
Menu key was previously only way to call AGS menu, but newer Android devices do not have Menu key anymore. Users suggested to show menu on Back key long press instead.

Android/README.md, after:

# Using the engine


## Adding games to the game list

By default games have to be placed into the external storage device. This is
usually the SD-card, but this can vary.

Place the game into the directory

    <EXTERN>/ags/<GAME NAME>/

<GAME NAME> is what will be displayed in the game list.



## Game options

Global options can be configured by pressing the MENU button on the game list
and choosing the "Preferences" item. These settings apply to all games unless
they have their own custom preferences set.

By performing a longclick on a game entry in the list, a menu opens that lets
you choose custom preferences specifically for that game.

In the same menu you can also choose "Continue" to resume the game from
your last savegame.



## Controls

-   Finger movement: Moving the mouse cursor
-   Single finger tap: Perform a left click
-   Tap with two fingers: Perform a right click
-   Longclick: Hold down the left mouse button until tapping the screen again
-   MENU button: Opens a menu for key input and quitting the game
-   MENU button longpress: Opens and closes the onscreen keyboard
-   BACK button: Sends ESC key command to the game
-   BACK button longpress: Opens a menu for key input and quitting the game




## Downloading prebuilt engine packages

Unsigned APKs suitable for running any compatible AGS game may be found linked in the
corresponding release posts on [AGS forum board](http://www.adventuregamestudio.co.uk/forums/index.php?board=28.0).



## MIDI playback

For midi music playback, you have to download GUS patches. We recommend
"Richard Sanders's GUS patches" from this address:

http://alleg.sourceforge.net/digmid.html

A direct link is here:

http://www.eglebbk.dds.nl/program/download/digmid.dat

This 'digmid.dat' is, in fact, a **bzip2** archive, containing actual data file,
which should be about 25 MB large. Extract that file, rename it to **patches.dat**
and place it into the  **ags** directory alongside your games.



# Building the engine

The Android app consists of three parts, each with different requirements:

- **Java app**: needs the Android SDK for Windows, Linux or Mac. If you build from command-line as opposed to Android Studio you also need Apache Ant. Requires built native engine library.
- **Native engine library**: needs the Android NDK for Windows, Linux or Mac. Requires built native 3rd party libraries.
- **Native 3rd party libraries**: need the Android NDK for Linux and number of tools (see full list in the corresponding section below).

For example, if you have got prebuilt native engine library (e.g. provided as a part of AGS release), you may follow instructions for "Java app" straight away.
If you are building from scratch, then first follow "Native 3rd party libraries", then "Native engine library", and "Java app" only then.


## Native 3rd party libraries

These are backend and utility libraries necessary for the AGS engine. Building them currently is only possible on Linux.

Requirements:
* Android NDK r16b (not later). This is the preferred NDK which is still able to build all the libraries and produce output compatible with older devices that we still support. Download link: https://developer.android.com/ndk/downloads/older_releases#ndk-16b-downloads
* Following tools must be installed on your Linux system as they are used for downloading library sources and  during build process: **autoconf**, **automake**, **cmake**, **curl**, **libtool**.

After you have installed Android NDK you have to prepare three standalone toolchains for the android-14 platform, for "arm", "x86" and "mips" processors.
(See https://developer.android.com/ndk/guides/standalone_toolchain.html for general reference.)

Set NDK_HOME variable, pointing to the location of Android NDK at your system, e.g. assuming the ndk is installed in '/opt/android-ndk-r16b':

    $ export NDK_HOME=/opt/android-ndk-r16b

then generate toolchains:

    $ $NDK_HOME/build/tools/make_standalone_toolchain.py --arch arm --api 14 --install-dir $NDK_HOME/platforms/android-14/arm
    $ $NDK_HOME/build/tools/make_standalone_toolchain.py --arch x86 --api 14 --install-dir $NDK_HOME/platforms/android-14/x86
    $ $NDK_HOME/build/tools/make_standalone_toolchain.py --arch mips --api 14 --install-dir $NDK_HOME/platforms/android-14/mips

If you don't specify "--install-dir" this will create an archive in a working directory, in which case you should manually unpack it to the respective place.

Now, assuming `<SOURCE>` is AGS source location,

    $ cd <SOURCE>/Android/buildlibs
    $ ./buildall.sh

This will download, patch, build and properly install the required libraries.

Library sources must be available in `<SOURCE>/libsrc`. Compiled libraries will be put in `<SOURCE>/Android/nativelibs`.


## Native engine library

This is the main AGS engine code. Before building it you must have native 3rd party libraries ready.

**IMPORTANT:** Android port integrates number of plugins as a part of the engine. Some of the plugin sources
may be included as submodules, so make sure to initialize submodules before compiling it, e.g. from the
root <SOURCE> directory:

    $ git submodule update --init --recursive

It must be compiled using the Android NDK. This can
simply be done by running ndk-build within the <SOURCE>Android/library directory.

e.g. (assuming the NDK is installed in /opt)

    $ export PATH=$PATH:/opt/android-ndk-r16b
    $ cd <SOURCE>/Android/library
    $ ndk-build

The native code is built for all current Android architecture, that is armv6, armv7-a,
x86 and mips.


## Java app

There are two parts to the Java app, one is the engine library in `<SOURCE>/Android/library` and the other one is the launcher app. The default launcher which displays a list of games from the SD-card is in `<SOURCE>/Android/launcher_list`.

You must have installed Android SDK for **Android 4.1** (api level 16); this may be done through Android Studio's SDK manager.

The easiest way to build the app is to create an Android project in Eclipse. Choose the "create from existing source" option and point Eclipse to the launcher directory.

To build from the command line, you can use Apache Ant (should have it installed first). If you go this way you also have to download an older version of Android SDK tools folder because ant's scripts were removed from the newer SDKs.
See [this stackoverflow.com question](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/42912824/the-ant-folder-is-suddenly-missing-from-android-sdk-did-google-remove-it) for the reference.
The download link for Linux: https://dl.google.com/android/repository/tools_r25.2.5-linux.zip

Unpack this archive into SDK/tools, *skipping* existing files.
Now you are ready to run the ant script, e.g. (assuming the SDK is installed in /opt):

    $ export ANDROID_HOME=/opt/android-sdk-linux
    $ cd <SOURCE>/Android/launcher_list
    $ ant debug
    $ ant release # for release build



## Links

Android SDK: http://developer.android.com/sdk/

Android NDK: http://developer.android.com/ndk/

Android thread on the AGS forum: http://www.adventuregamestudio.co.uk/yabb/index.php?topic=44768.0
